5 - Operating Systems/00 - References and Topics.md, before:

# Subject: Operating Systems  
**References:**

1. A. Silberschatz, P. Galvin, and G. Gagne, *Operating System Concepts*, John Wiley & Sons, 10th Edition, 2019.  
2. A. Tanenbaum and Herbert Bos, *Modern Operating Systems*, Pearson, 3rd Edition, 2021.  
3. D. Dhamdhere, *Operating Systems: A Concept-Based Approach*, McGraw-Hill Publishers, 2008.

**Topics:**

1. Computer system overviews.  
2. Process management: Process versus thread, CPU scheduling algorithms, threads and concurrency.  
3. Process synchronization: Classical synchronization problems, semaphores and monitors, deadlock (characteristics, models, and synchronization tools).  
4. Deadlocks: Modeling and methods for handling deadlocks: prevention, avoidance, and detection and recovery.  
5. Memory management: Memory allocation techniques, virtual memory management algorithms, page-frame allocation, file system access methods, and directory structures.  
6. Input/Output and File Systems: I/O hardware, application I/O interface, kernel I/O interface, access methods, and directory/file system management.

Commit message:

vault backup: 2025-04-09 14:22:26
Affected files:
.obsidian/workspace.json

5 - Operating Systems/00 - References and Topics.md, after:

# Subject: Operating Systems  
**References:**

1. A. Silberschatz, P. Galvin, and G. Gagne, *Operating System Concepts*, John Wiley & Sons, 10th Edition, 2019.  
2. A. Tanenbaum and Herbert Bos, *Modern Operating Systems*, Pearson, 4th Edition, 2021.  
3. D. Dhamdhere, *Operating Systems: A Concept-Based Approach*, McGraw-Hill Publishers, 2008.

**Topics:**

1. Computer system overview.  
2. Process management: Process versus thread, CPU scheduling algorithms, threads and concurrency.  
3. Process synchronization: classical synchronization problems (critical-section, readers-writers, dining philosophers, etc.), and synchronization tools (semaphores, monitors, etc.).  
4. Process deadlock: deadlock model and methods for handling deadlocks: prevention, avoidance, and detection and recovery.  
5. Memory management: Memory allocation techniques (paging vs segmentation), virtual memory (replacement algorithms, page-frame allocation relation, and thrashing), file system (access methods, file and directory structures, and file and directory implementation).  
6. Input/Output and File Systems: I/O hardware, application I/O interface, kernel I/O interface, access methods, directory structure and memory mapped files.  
7. Protection and security.  
8. Virtual Machines: Benefits and features, types of VM’s and their implementations, and virtualization and operating-system concepts.
